In DNA translation, we have steps to follow. main tasks constitute: 
  step 1: Manually download DNA and Protein Sequence data 
  step 2: importing DNA data into python 
  step 3: create an algorithm to translate the DNA 
  step 4: CHECK if translation matches your download

So, Our first task is to manually download DNA and protein sequence for this case study. The NCBI is the National Center for Biotechnology Information,
and it is United States' main public repository of DNA and related information. we will download two files from the NCBI. 

first file is Strand of DNA
and second file is Corresponding Protein Sequence

for that, lets GOOGLE NCBI and we will see the following site where we have to search for Neucleotide in the top search bar.     And in this field we need to enter a specific code that corresponds
 to the sample that we want to download.
 
    Here you need to be careful to type in exactly the following:
    capital N, capital M, underscore 207618.2.
    Once you have entered this exact string you can hit Search.
    If you did your search correctly you should see the same page
    that we have here up on the computer.
    This page contains a lot of information about this specific sample.
    We are primarily interested, first, in the DNA sequence.
    The DNA sequence is shown at the bottom of the page
    but the best way to download these data is the following:
    You can go to the very top of the page, you can click FASTA,
    and then you have the sequence here on the screen.
    You can then use your mouse and your cursor to highlight the sequence.
    Make sure you include the very first letter, which is G,
    and the very last letter, which is T. We can copy that,
    and then we go to our IDLE.
    here is the DNA sequence i have copied from the screen.
    
    GGTCAGAAAAAGCCCTCTCCATGTCTACTCACGATACATCCCTGAAAACCACTGAGGAAGTGGCTTTTCA
GATCATCTTGCTTTGCCAGTTTGGGGTTGGGACTTTTGCCAATGTATTTCTCTTTGTCTATAATTTCTCT
CCAATCTCGACTGGTTCTAAACAGAGGCCCAGACAAGTGATTTTAAGACACATGGCTGTGGCCAATGCCT
TAACTCTCTTCCTCACTATATTTCCAAACAACATGATGACTTTTGCTCCAATTATTCCTCAAACTGACCT
CAAATGTAAATTAGAATTCTTCACTCGCCTCGTGGCAAGAAGCACAAACTTGTGTTCAACTTGTGTTCTG
AGTATCCATCAGTTTGTCACACTTGTTCCTGTTAATTCAGGTAAAGGAATACTCAGAGCAAGTGTCACAA
ACATGGCAAGTTATTCTTGTTACAGTTGTTGGTTCTTCAGTGTCTTAAATAACATCTACATTCCAATTAA
GGTCACTGGTCCACAGTTAACAGACAATAACAATAACTCTAAAAGCAAGTTGTTCTGTTCCACTTCTGAT
TTCAGTGTAGGCATTGTCTTCTTGAGGTTTGCCCATGATGCCACATTCATGAGCATCATGGTCTGGACCA
GTGTCTCCATGGTACTTCTCCTCCATAGACATTGTCAGAGAATGCAGTACATATTCACTCTCAATCAGGA
CCCCAGGGGCCAAGCAGAGACCACAGCAACCCATACTATCCTGATGCTGGTAGTCACATTTGTTGGCTTT
TATCTTCTAAGTCTTATTTGTATCATCTTTTACACCTATTTTATATATTCTCATCATTCCCTGAGGCATT
GCAATGACATTTTGGTTTCGGGTTTCCCTACAATTTCTCCTTTACTGTTGACCTTCAGAGACCCTAAGGG
TCCTTGTTCTGTGTTCTTCAACTGTTGAAAGCCAGAGTCACTAAAAATGCCAAACACAGAAGACAGCTTT
GCTAATACCATTAAATACTTTATTCCATAAATATGTTTTTAAAAGCTTGTATGAACAAGGTATGGTGCTC
ACTGCTATACTTATAAAAGAGTAAGGTTATAATCACTTGTTGATATGAAAAGATTTCTGGTTGGAATCTG
ATTGAAACAGTGAGTTATTCACCACCCTCCATTCTCT
    
    I like to create a new file here so I just click New File.
    I then delete whatever happens to be on the screen.
    And the next step is to paste the DNA sequence into the editor.
    The next step for us is to save this DNA sequence.
    I have previously created a directory that I have called python_case_studies.
    I first go there.
    This case study is a translation case study
    so I will be selecting that folder.
    I want to call this file dna.txt, and I recommend
    you use that same file name convention.
    I then have to choose a dot txt in the menu
    here because we're saving a text file not a Python file.
    And if all goes well, you should now have dna.txt
    in your python_case_studies directory.
    Let's then go back from our sequence page, the main page for this sample.
    And to download the amino acid sequence you can click CDS.
    CDS stands for the coding sequence.
    If you look at the bottom right corner of your screen,
    you will see the translation here at the bottom of the pop-up window.
    I'm going to select that.
    Then I'll go back to my Python editor.
    I'll open a New File.
    I'll remove whatever is in this file, and then I will paste the amino acid
    sequence into the editor.
    I will then go to Save.
    I will then pick my previously created python_case_studies directory.
    I go to translation.
    And I'm going to call this file protein.txt.
    Again, it's a text file so I need to make
    sure I choose text file in the menu.
    And now we have downloaded both the DNA sequence and the protein sequence file.
    
    
    Step 2: Importing DNA data into python
    The best way to read a file depends on what you'd like to do with the file.
    If you need to read a large file, but you're only
    interested in some of the lines, not all of them,
    you could read the file in a for loop, one line at a time, process the line,
    or skip it, and move onto the next line.
    We've seen an example of this earlier in the course.
    This approach leads to memory efficient and fast code.
    Another option is to read the entire file in one go.
    In this case, we will be doing that because we do not need
    to skip over any lines in the file.
    Before you start working with files, make sure
    that your Python working directory corresponds to the directory
    where you downloaded your files.
    You can type pwd, which stands for print working directory, in your IPython
    shell.
    And, in this case, I do need to move to a different directory.
    CD stands for change directory.
    I'm going to go to Python case studies.
    Then I'll issue cd again.
    I want to go to the translation case study.
    I can now say pwd again, and my working directory has now been changed.
    Now, let's read the file.
    Let me first specify the name of the input file.
    I'm going to call that variable input file.
    And, in this case, it's dna.txt.
    I'll then be using the open function to open the input file.
    The second argument is r which is short for reading.
    I want to capture the file object here.
    I'm going to call that f.
    And, finally, I can use the f.read method to read the entire file.
    I want to make sure that I capture the contents of that file.
    In this case, what I am reading is a sequence,
    so I'm going to call that variable seq.
    So seq = f.read.
    I want to move this code here in my editor for later use.
    And now we can look at the sequence.
    You can either say print seq or you can just type seq.
    So it looks like the reading operation was successful.
    If you look carefully, you can see some additional characters in the text.
    It looks like backslash n appears in the text with some frequency.
    This is a special character that affects the way the string gets printed,
    and we ended up with these extra characters
    because we copy pasted the text from a web browser to the editor.
    You can see how these characters affect the way the string is printed
    by asking Python to print the data.
    So we type print seq,
    and you see that the data appear differently on the screen.
    These extra characters will cause problems for translation
    so how could we remove them?
    An easy way is to use the replace method which takes two arguments--
    it replaces every occurrence of the first argument substring
    with the second argument, another substring.
    We can type seq.replace.
    The first is going to be "\n",
    that's what gets replaced,
    and we will replace that with nothing.
    Because strings are immutable, the method returns a new string.
    So in order for us to use the new string,
    we need to assign it to a variable.
    In this case, I'm going to reassign it to the same variable as before.
    We'll take the same comment we had before.
    I'll just type seq = seq.replace.
    Let's try printing seq.
    And, in this case, we do not have those extra line breaks
    that we had there before.
    Let me take this line of code and move it up to the editor for future use.
    Sometimes there may be another character hiding in a string,
    and depending on your computer, it may or may not be visible.
    Just to be on the safe side, let's remove that as well.
    There is no harm in running this extra step
    because if you don't have the extra character nothing happens.
    We'll be using the same command as before.
    But, in this case, we will be removing the backslash r character
    and we'll replace that with nothing.
    I will again take and copy paste this line here,
    and we are ready to move on.


step 3: create an algorithm to translate the DNA 
    ranscript. Skip to the end.
    The translation process is essentially a table lookup operation.
    Python provides a very natural object for dealing
    with these types of situations.
    This object is a dictionary.
    In this case, the key objects are strings,
    each consisting of three letters drawn from the four letter alphabet.
    The value object is also a string but a string
    consisting of just one character.
    Defining a dictionary can be somewhat tedious.
    In this case, we've already done this work for you.
    We've created a dictionary called table where
    the keys are strings corresponding to codons or nucleotide triples.
    And their values are also strings which correspond to common one-letter symbols
    used for the different amino acids.
    Let's then open the file table.py.
    It's in my python_case_studies translation dictionary.
    I'm going to open that.
    And I'll just mark the table, making sure to get the full table.
    I will then go back to my editor here, and I'll
    copy paste the dictionary in here.
    You'll see that the table dictionary appears indented.
    This is going to cause problems.
    So I want to make sure I will de-indent the dictionary.
    And now we're good to continue.
    Let's first make sure we know how to use this translation table.
    How would you look up the key that corresponds to CAA or CCT or GTA?
    I'm going to first just type table.
    And I might initially type CAA.
    But this is a problem because the keys themselves are strings.
    That's why I need to provide a string as an input.
    And now I get the desired output.
    To look up CCT I can just change to string CCT,
    and the output is P. Let's then think about how to approach this problem.
    Here are the steps that I would take.
    First, I would check that the length of the sequence is
    actually divisible by three.
    It should be, but sometimes things go wrong so it's important to check this.
    Next, I would look up each three-letter string in our table
    and store the result somewhere.
    Finally, you keep doing this in a loop until you
    get to the end of the sequence.
    Let's write some informal pseudocode step-by-step instructions
    on how to proceed.
    Let me first create some space here in my editor.
    The first task I would like to do is to check the length of the sequence.
    So, you might say something like check that the sequence
    length is divisible by three.
    If that's true I can then loop over the sequence.
    For each iteration of the loop I will need to extract a single codon.
    And finally, I need to look up the codon and store the result. Look up the codon
    and store the result.
    This is certainly not a formal pseudocode
    but these step-by-step instructions will hopefully help us
    as we start writing the actual code.
    Here we're going to check the length of the sequence.
    For a number to be divisible by three it must be that division by three
    yields a remainder of zero.
    Python, like many other languages, has a so-called modulo operator that
    yields to remainder from a division.
    If you haven't come across the modulo operator
    this would be a good time to go online and search for it.
    Let's look at a couple of examples of the modulo operator.
    7 divided by 3 yields 2.33.
    Let's do 6 divided by 3.
    That gives 2.0.
    In the first example, we would expect to have remainder, but in the second
    we would not.
    So we go back to the example 7 divided by 3
    and we replace division with modulo.
    The result is 1.
    3 divides 7 twice and 1 is left over.
    Let's look at the second example, 6 divided by 3.
    If we do 6 modulo 3, in this case, 3 divides 6 exactly twice
    and nothing is left over.
    Let's look at the length of the sequence.
    And we can then ask if this is divisible by three?
    In this case, the answer is no.
    And this is something that we'll come back to later.
    Lets start writing the code here.
    So we are now dealing with the first step in our pseudocode.
    We'd like to ask if the length of sequence modulo 3 is equal to 0.
    If that's the case, then we do have a valid sequence
    and we can proceed with the code.
    If you try running this, we can remove the first comment here,
    if you try running this you'll see that it will not run.
    That's because if it is a compound statement
    and Python expects something to be on the following line.
    We can use the pass statement here if we'd like to run the code.
    It doesn't do anything, which may sound odd,
    but it's helpful when Python syntax requires
    some statement, as is the case here.
    We can now try rerunning this, and the code runs.
    Let's then think about the loop.
    To loop over the sequence one character at a time
    we could use the following structure.
    We can type for s in seq.
    And then we might just print s.
    We could build our codons one character at a time but in this case,
    string slicing is probably a better alternative.
    Let's take our sequence and let's slice it.
    The starting point of the slice is 0 and the end point is 3.
    Remember, in this case, when you're slicing
    a string the elements that will be located
    are those at positions zero, one, and two.
    In other words, Python stops before it hits the stop index.
    If I'd like to look at the next element, I want to start at 3 and end at 6.
    To look at the third element of the sequence I would start at 6
    and end at 9, and so on.
    So to start a slice I need to sequence 0, 3, 6,
    and so on for the starting locations.
    The endpoint is always going to be the starting point plus three.
    This seems to call for a range object.
    For a range object we specify the starting point first, say
    0, the end point, let's say 11, and the step size.
    In this case, we've defined a range object.
    But if we want to print out the values we need to first turn that into a list.
    So I'm constructing a range object but to see the actual values in the range
    object I will turn that into a list.
    We can now continue with our code.
    I then want to take my range object and move it to my code here.
    This replaces the pass statement.
    This is going to be a for loop.
    So we'll say for i in range starting from zero we
    want to go to the end of the sequence.
    So the length of the sequence goes in here.
    And we go in steps of three.
    This is the looping over the sequence part.
    So this line is now done.
    The next step is going to be extracting a single codon.
    I'm going to call that codon because that makes sense.
    I'll take my sequence, and the first starting point is going to be i.
    And I will slice from i to i plus 3.
    Again, this enables me to extract the codon.
    I can try running this code.
    And we see that the code runs.
    The next step is to look up the codon and store it.
    We can store the protein in a string and concatenate amino acids to it
    one at a time.
    Let's go back to our code.
    I will first initially need to create my protein.
    I'm just going to call the protein.
    And it's going to be an empty string.
    Once I've extracted my codon I need to look it up.
    Remember, my table is called table, that's my translation table.
    I can look up my codon by typing table codon.
    And this is my new amino acid that has to be appended to the end of protein.
    Protein is a string so we can concatenate the existing protein
    string to the new string, which is created
    by the table codon expression here using the shorthand notation plus equals.
    So in this case, we're looking up each codon one at a time
    and we are concatenating that to the existing protein string.
    I've now completed the last line.
    So I'm going to erase that and I'm going to try running my code.
    The code runs so at least we know that we don't have any syntax errors so far.
    It's helpful to turn our code into a function
    so that we can easily call it using different sequences.
    First I need to start with the def statement.
    I'm going to call this function translate
    because it translates the input sequence, a DNA sequence,
    into a sequence of amino acids.
    We need a colon on at the end of the function definition.
    We then need to indent the code that I have here.
    Finally, we need a return statement that returns the protein
    to whoever called this function.
    And our function should be ready at this point.
    Let's then try running the definition of the function.
    And in this case, we are not getting any error messages,
    which is what we wanted.
    We can also try actually running the function.
    We've now defined it but we haven't actually run it yet on any input data.
    Let's look at a couple of simple examples.
    I'd like to translate say, ATA, and the result should be I, which is correct.
    Let me try one more example.
    I might want to translate triple A, and the answer should be K.
    So, so far we're in good shape.
    While we're at it, let's add a docstring to our function.
    A docstring is a string literal that occurs
    as the first statement in a module function,
    or a class, or a method definition, and it becomes part of that object.
    You or somebody else can then use the help function
    to learn more about the function using the docstring.
    The docstring should summarize the behavior of the function
    and document its arguments, returned values, possible side effects,
    and anything else that would be important for a user
    to know about the function.
    While the function is still fresh in our minds,
    let's try writing a short docstring.
    Here's an example of a docstring that I wrote earlier.
    Make sure to include your docstring inside the function definition.
    We can now rerun the definition of the function which contains the docstring.
    We have just redefined it.
    If I now type help translate you'll see that the docstring
    has become part of the function.
    
Step 4:     Our final task in the short case study is
    to compare your translation to the official one obtained from the NCBI
    website.
    Let's look at how we read in the DNA sequence file before.
    In our code, we defined first the name of the input file as dna.txt.
    We then opened that file, and then we have read in the entire file in one go.
    There is another way to read in an entire file, which is usually
    preferred to our previous approach.
    This new way involves a with statement, and the reason it's preferred
    is because it's better able to cope with situations
    where something goes wrong with the reading of the file.
    You can read more about it online.
    Here, I will just demonstrate how it works.
    Let's take our existing code.
    We'll just copy and paste it here above.
    The first line doesn't change.
    Our input file is still dna.txt.
    With the with statement, the word with becomes the first statement
    on the line.
    The second one is open, which actually opens our file.
    At the end of the line, we add as f.
    In this case, we are using the with statement
    to open a file we are still calling our file object, f.
    We now need to indent the third line, seq equals f.read.
    This is because with is a compound statement, so it ends with a colon,
    and that's why the following line has to be indented.
    Let's turn our sequence reading code into a function that reads in the file
    and automatically replaces backslash n and backslash r
    characters with an empty space.
    We're going to be defining a function called read sequence, read_seq.
    First, we have def.
    The input argument is going to be inputfile, and we need our colon here.
    The first two lines will be just reading in the file,
    but I need to make sure to indent these two lines.
    The next step will be to do the replacements of backslash n
    and backslash r with empty space.
    Again, we need to indent these.
    And finally, we need to return the sequence
    to whoever called our function.
    So we'll say return sequence.
    While the function is still fresh in our minds,
    let's make sure to add a short docstring.
    In this case, the function reads and returns
    the input sequence with special characters removed.
    Now that we have defined the function, let's
    first run the definition of the function.
    And we can now try using it.
    I would first like to read in the protein sequence,
    so we'll say prt equals read_seq.
    The input is a string, protein.txt.
    And the function runs.
    We can also read in the DNA sequence by saying DNA
    equals-- the sequence is called DNA.
    And now we've read also our DNA sequence.
    We can try translating the DNA sequence, but in this case,
    the output is an empty string .
    This suggests that there might be a problem with the length of our DNA
    sequence.
    If you look at the length of our DNA sequence,
    we can ask if that is divisible by 3.
    In this case, we have a remainder of 2, so we know that it's not.
    To understand what's going on, let's go back to the NCBI website.
    If you look at the website where it says CDS,
    you will see two numbers next to it, 21 and 938.
    These are the locations of the gene where
    the coding sequence starts and ends.
    So instead of taking the entire DNA sequence,
    we would really like to be doing the translation starting at position 21
    and ending at 938.
    We can use string slicing to obtain the part of the sequence that we want.
    However, we need to be careful with the indices.
    If you investigate the NCBI website, you will
    see that the sequence positions are numbered from 1 to 1157.
    In Python, indexing starts at 0, so genome positions 21 and 938
    correspond to Python string positions 20 and 937.
    So the starting point of the string slice will be 20,
    but the stopping location of the string is 938.
    This is because when we specify the stopping location as 938,
    the last character to be included is at position 937, which
    is exactly what we want.
    Let's try rerunning our translate function.
    We take the DNA sequence-- not all of it.
    In this case, we start at 20 and we want to end at 938.
    In this case, we're at least getting a translation.
    We can then print out our protein sequence, which is prt.
    If you compare these two sequences, you will
    see that they look almost identical.
    The only difference between these two sequences
    is the underscore character that appears at the end of our translated sequence.
    So here's what's going on.
    At the very end of a protein coding sequence,
    nature places what's called a stop codon.
    There are three stop codons, and their function
    is to tell someone reading the sequence that this
    is where you should stop reading.
    It's almost like an end of paragraph sign.
    The stop codon is not included in the downloaded protein,
    because it's usually not of interest.
    But when we download the DNA sequence and translate it ourselves,
    the stop codon is included in the translation.
    Therefore, we should really skip the last codon from our translation,
    and we can modify the stopping point of the slice.
    So let's try rerunning our protein translation,
    but instead of ending the slice at 938, we'll end it at 935.
    In this case, the protein looks identical to our downloaded protein.
    To check if it is, we can ask Python if prt, the downloaded protein,
    is equal to the translated protein.
    When we run this line on the screen, Python
    returns true, which means success.
    An alternative approach is the following:
    The function translate returns a string of amino acids.
    So instead of omitting the last three characters from the DNA sequence,
    I can just omit the very last character of the translated amino acid sequence.
    Let's try running that.
    In this case, we want to translate the protein all the way to location 938,
    but we want to exclude the last character of the translation.
    That's why we slice the output from the very beginning,
    and we only exclude the last character.
    Again, our translated protein and the protein sequence we have downloaded
    are identical.
    We have accomplished four tasks in this case study.
    First, we have manually downloaded the DNA and protein sequence data
    from the website.
    Second, we imported the DNA data into Python.
    We then created an algorithm that translated the DNA using a dictionary.
    Finally, we checked that the DNA translation
    matched the downloaded amino acid sequence, the protein
    string, which it did.
    I hope you both enjoyed this case study and learned a lot of Python.

Here is the final code of the DNA translation module:


inpfile = "dna.txt"
def read_seq(inpfile):
    """Reads and return the input sequence with special characters removed."""
    with open(inpfile, "r") as f:
        seq = f.read()
        seq = seq.replace("\n", "")
        seq = seq.replace("\r", "")
    return seq

#reading the file dna.txt
inpfile = "dna.txt"
f = open(inpfile, "r")
seq = f.read()
seq = seq.replace("\n", "")
seq = seq.replace("\r", "")
len(seq)

def translate(seq):
    #include docstring which provides the behaviour of the function
    """Translate a string containing a nucleotide sequence into a string containing the corresponding sequence of amino acids .
     Nucleotides are translated in triplets using the table dictionary; each amino acid 4 is encoded with a string of length 1. """
    table = {
        'ATA': 'I', 'ATC': 'I', 'ATT': 'I', 'ATG': 'M',
        'ACA': 'T', 'ACC': 'T', 'ACG': 'T', 'ACT': 'T',
        'AAC': 'N', 'AAT': 'N', 'AAA': 'K', 'AAG': 'K',
        'AGC': 'S', 'AGT': 'S', 'AGA': 'R', 'AGG': 'R',
        'CTA': 'L', 'CTC': 'L', 'CTG': 'L', 'CTT': 'L',
        'CCA': 'P', 'CCC': 'P', 'CCG': 'P', 'CCT': 'P',
        'CAC': 'H', 'CAT': 'H', 'CAA': 'Q', 'CAG': 'Q',
        'CGA': 'R', 'CGC': 'R', 'CGG': 'R', 'CGT': 'R',
        'GTA': 'V', 'GTC': 'V', 'GTG': 'V', 'GTT': 'V',
        'GCA': 'A', 'GCC': 'A', 'GCG': 'A', 'GCT': 'A',
        'GAC': 'D', 'GAT': 'D', 'GAA': 'E', 'GAG': 'E',
        'GGA': 'G', 'GGC': 'G', 'GGG': 'G', 'GGT': 'G',
        'TCA': 'S', 'TCC': 'S', 'TCG': 'S', 'TCT': 'S',
        'TTC': 'F', 'TTT': 'F', 'TTA': 'L', 'TTG': 'L',
        'TAC': 'Y', 'TAT': 'Y', 'TAA': '_', 'TAG': '_',
        'TGC': 'C', 'TGT': 'C', 'TGA': '_', 'TGG': 'W',
    }
    #check the length of the sequence of genes and check if it can be divisible by 3
    protein = ""
    # get use of python modulo operator
    if len(seq) % 3 == 0:
        for i in range(0, len(seq), 3):     # loop over the sequence
                codon = seq[i:i+3]         #extract a single codon
                protein = protein + table[codon]          #look up the codon and store the result
    return protein


prt = read_seq("protein.txt")
dna = read_seq("dna.txt")

len(dna)
print(len(dna))

print(translate(dna[20:938]))
prt == translate(dna[20:935])


